Overview of Computers Workshop
Institute Core
L-T-P-C: 2-1-1-4
1. Course Objectives:
The objective of this course is to provide an overview of different components involved
in a computer, including Desktop, Laptop and Mobile. The course will provide a
demonstration of different basic commands and technologies involved in the computer
world.

2. Revised Syllabus:
Unit – 1 [8 Hours]: Basic Computer Organization, Processors and its organization, CPU,
Memory, Storage Devices, Interfaces, Number System (Binary); Types of Memories -
Channel and Bus Architectures, Standard buses - Devices and Controllers - Ports and
Connectors - Bootstrap Loaders - Inside of a typical desktop/laptop - Motherboard and
Switch settings and Jumpers - Servers
Unit – 2 [8 Hours]: Layers of Software, BIOS - Operating System - Windows, Linux and
Android - File Systems – Windows, Linux and Android - Utilities and Tools - Device
Drivers, Programming Tools - Compiler, Linker, Loader - Database Management Systems
Unit – 3 [12 Hours]: Linux Kernel - Basic Commands in Linux / Windows - Shell Scripts –
Bourne/Bash Shell
Unit – 4 [8 Hours]: Computer Networks Networks and Types of Networks - Protocol
Layers Ethernet, TCP/IP, IP Address and significance, Internet and its Protocols (http,
https, ftp) - Security related topics
Unit – 5 [4 Hours]: Mobile Devices - Basics of Mobile based computing, Hardware
Components of a mobile device. Internet through Data Communication – 2G, 3G, 4G,
5G - WiFi and Near Field Communication
Unit – 6 [8 Hours]: Microprocessors (8085/8086) and Microcontrollers, Introduction to
Assembly Language and Embedded C

3. Course Outcomes (Unit wise):
At the end of the course, students should have the ability:
i) To become familiar with various components of a modern computer and the
number systems conversions
ii) To understanding various components of a computer software system including
system software and application software.
iii) To gain expertise with the usage the commands in Linux/Unix/Windows operating
systems and various commands for handling file operations and shell scripting in
these operating systems.
iv) To understand the layered architecture and example protocols in Application,
Transport and MAC layers
v) To comprehend inside of mobile device and the communication mechanism
involved
vi) To develop basic assembly codes using microprocessor, and microcontroller and
understand the difference between C and Embedded C

4. Text Books:
a) John Hayes, Computer Architecture and Organization, McGraw Hill Education, 3 rd
Edition (1 July 2017)
b) Ron White, Tim Downs, How Computers Work, BPB Publications; 1 st Edition, 2016
c) Phillip Barry, Overview of Computer Science, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities,
2015

5. Reference Books:
a) David Reed, J. Glenn Brookshear, Introduction to Computer Science: A Balanced
Overview, Pearson (January 1, 2011)
b) G. Michael Schneider, and Judith L. Gersting, Invitation to Computer Science,
Thompson (5 th Edition), 2010
c) Mark G. Sobell, A Practical Guide to Ubuntu, (4 th Edition)
d) Mark G. Sobell, A Practical Guide to Ubuntu Linux, Prentice Hall; 4 th Edition (23
December 2014)
e) AT&amp;T Unix System V Users Manual
f) Andrew S. Tanenbaum, Computer Networks, Pearson Education India, 2013 (5 th
Edition)
g) Pattnaik and Mall, Fundamentals of Mobile Computing, Prentice-Hall of India Pvt.
Ltd, 2015 (2 nd Edition)